# Project 1: Threads

## Preliminaries

> Fill in your name and email address.

FirstName LastName <email@domain.example>

> If you have any preliminary comments on your submission, notes for the
> TAs, please give them here.
> Please cite any offline or online sources you consulted while
> preparing your submission, other than the Pintos documentation, course
> text, lecture notes, and course staff.

## Alarm Clock

### 1.1 DATA STRUCTURES

> A1: Copy here the declaration of each new or changed struct or struct member, global or static variable, typedef, or enumeration.  Identify the purpose of each in 25 words or less.

#### New

##### `sleep_list` (thread.c)

List of threads in `THREAD_BLOCK` state that are sleeping until some predetermined tick value.

```c
static struct list sleep_list;
```

#### Changed

##### `thread` (thread.h)

Added `wakeup_tick`: tick value at which the thread will be unblocked.

```c
struct thread
{
    /* Owned by thread.c. */
    tid_t tid;                          /**< Thread identifier. */
    enum thread_status status;          /**< Thread state. */
    char name[16];                      /**< Name (for debugging purposes). */
    uint8_t *stack;                     /**< Saved stack pointer. */
    int priority;                       /**< Thread priority at any given time. */
    struct list_elem allelem;           /**< List element for all threads list. */

    /* Shared between thread.c and synch.c. */
    struct list_elem elem;              /**< List element. */

    /* Owned by devices/timer.c */
    int64_t wakeup_tick;               /**< Thread-blocking sleep */

    /* Owned by thread.c. */
    uint32_t magic;                     /**< Detects stack overflow. */
};

```

### 1.2 ALGORITHMS

> A2: Briefly describe what happens in a call to timer_sleep(),
> including the effects of the timer interrupt handler.

The wake up tick of the thread calling `timer_sleep()` is calculated and stored as a member of its struct. The thread is then added to `sleep_list` and finally blocked by calling `thread_block()`, which will set its status to `THREAD_BLOCK` and call `schedule()` to find a new thread to run.

On the other hand, the timer interrupt handler will check if any threads in `sleep_list` are ready to wake up. If so, they are popped from `sleep_list` and unblocked by calling `thread_unblock()`, which sets their status to `THREAD_READY` and adds them to `ready_list`.

> A3: What steps are taken to minimize the amount of time spent in
> the timer interrupt handler?

Every insertion of a new thread into `sleep_list` is done in a sorted manner: the ones to wake up earlier positioned before the rest. This way, we don't have the check the whole list on every interrupt to find which threads to wake up. We only need to iterate until we find the first thread that is not ready to wake up yet, since every thread after that will also not be ready. A lot of the times, we can stop at the first element.

```
                               ticks: 113
         (front)                                        (back)
                  +---+   +---+   +---+   +---+   +---+           
           NULL - | t | - | t | - | t | - | t | - | t | - NULL
                  +---+   +---+   +---+   +---+   +---+
wakeup_tick:      111     112     115     140     148
                  |       |       |
                  |       |       |
wake up ----------+-------+       |
stop here ------------------------+
```

### 1.3 SYNCHRONIZATION

> A4: How are race conditions avoided when multiple threads call
> timer_sleep() simultaneously?

As mentioned, a call to `timer_sleep()` causes a insertion into `sleep_list`. Atomicity must be enforced when altering shared data structures to avoid corruption. This is done by disabling interrupts during the insertion, which prevents other threads from being scheduled and calling `timer_sleep()`.

> A5: How are race conditions avoided when a timer interrupt occurs
> during a call to timer_sleep()?

The thread is blocked only after inserting it to `sleep_list`. A timer interrupt between these two steps might try to unblock the thread before it has been even blocked. To avoid this, the critical section encompasses both the insertion and blocking of the thread.

### 1.4 RATIONALE

> A6: Why did you choose this design?  In what ways is it superior to
> another design you considered?

We considered adding a zero-initialized semaphore member to `struct thread`, decremented by `timer_sleep()` to block the thread, and incremented by the timer interrupt handler to unblock it. This turned out to be a waste of space, since every semaphore stores a list of threads waiting on it, which is not needed in this case. We can use `thread_block()` and `thread_unblock()` directly and achieve the same result, disabling interrupts when it's necessary.

## Priority Scheduling

### 2.1 DATA STRUCTURES

> B1: Copy here the declaration of each new or changed struct or struct member, global or static variable, typedef, or enumeration.  Identify the purpose of each in 25 words or less.

#### ChangedP

##### `thread` (thread.h)

Added:
- `og_priority`: Priority assigned to the thread at creation.
- `donor_list`: List of priority donors.
- `donors_elem`: `list_elem` to hook into other threads' `donor_list`.
- `waiting_for_thread`: Lock that this thread is waiting for. 

```c
struct thread
{
    /* Owned by thread.c. */
    tid_t tid;
    enum thread_status status;
    char name[16];
    uint8_t *stack;

    int priority;
    int og_priority;
    struct list donor_list;
    struct list_elem donors_elem;
    struct thread * waiting_for_thread;
    struct list_elem allelem;

    /* Shared between thread.c and synch.c. */
    struct list_elem elem;

    /* Owned by devices/timer.c */
    int64_t wakeup_tick;

    /* Owned by thread.c. */
    uint32_t magic;
};
```

> B2: Explain the data structure used to track priority donation.
> Use ASCII art to diagram a nested donation.  (Alternately, submit a
> .png file.)

We're gonna illustrate this explanation based on a sample case. Consider the following scenario: `Thread A` (priority 30) needs lock 1, which is held by `Thread B` (priority 20). Thread B needs lock 2, which is held by `Thread C` (priority 10).

Since `Thread A` depends on lock 1, it sets its `waiting_for_thread` to `Thread B` and donates its priority to `Thread B`. `Thread A` then gets locked because it needs lock 1 from B, so it exits the `ready_list` and moves to the `waiters` list of the `semaphore` corresponding to that `lock`. Meanwhile, its `donor_elem` is added to the `donor_list` of B.

Next, since `Thread B` is blocked by `lock` 2 held by `Thread C`, it follows the same process, donating its priority to C, exiting the `ready_list`, and moving to the `waiters` list of the `semaphore` for `lock` 2. Now, `Thread B` is also in the `donor_list` of C.

The thread with the highest priority executes and eventually releases the `lock` of the thread it is currently blocking. When a thread releases a lock, it updates the priorities of its donating threads in its `donor_list`.

      +------------------+
      |    Thread A      |
      | Priority: 30     |
      | Waiting For: B   |
      +------------------+
               |
               | Donates priority to B
               v
      +------------------+
      |    Thread B      |
      | Priority: 20     |
      | Donor List: A    |
      | Waiting For: C   |
      +------------------+
               |
               | Donates priority to C
               v
      +------------------+
      |    Thread C      |
      | Priority: 10     |
      | Donor List: B    |
      +------------------+

### 2.2 ALGORITHMS

> B3: How do you ensure that the highest priority thread waiting for
> a lock, semaphore, or condition variable wakes up first?

> B4: Describe the sequence of events when a call to lock_acquire()
> causes a priority donation.  How is nested donation handled?

> B5: Describe the sequence of events when lock_release() is called
> on a lock that a higher-priority thread is waiting for.

### 2.3 SYNCHRONIZATION

> B6: Describe a potential race in thread_set_priority() and explain
> how your implementation avoids it.  Can you use a lock to avoid
> this race?

### 2.4 RATIONALE

> B7: Why did you choose this design?  In what ways is it superior to
> another design you considered?

## Advanced Scheduler

### 3.1 DATA STRUCTURES

> C1: Copy here the declaration of each new or changed struct or struct member, global or static variable, typedef, or enumeration.  Identify the purpose of each in 25 words or less.

### 3.2 ALGORITHMS

> C2: How is the way you divided the cost of scheduling between code
> inside and outside interrupt context likely to affect performance?

### 3.3 RATIONALE

> C3: Briefly critique your design, pointing out advantages and
> disadvantages in your design choices.  If you were to have extra
> time to work on this part of the project, how might you choose to
> refine or improve your design?

> C4: The assignment explains arithmetic for fixed-point math in
> detail, but it leaves it open to you to implement it.  Why did you
> decide to implement it the way you did?  If you created an
> abstraction layer for fixed-point math, that is, an abstract data
> type and/or a set of functions or macros to manipulate fixed-point
> numbers, why did you do so?  If not, why not?
